The earth is tilted on its axis 23.5 degrees. As it rotates around the sun, the tilt of the earth’s axis provides different
climatic seasons because of the variations in the angle of direct sunlight on the planet. Places receiving more direct
sunlight experience a warmer climate. Elsewhere, the increased angle of incoming solar radiation near the earth’s
poles results in more reflected sunlight and thus a cooler climate. The Northern Hemisphere experiences winter
when sunlight is reflected off the earth’s surface and less of the sun’s energy is absorbed because of a sharper
angle from the sun.

The Tropic of Cancer is the parallel at 23.5 degrees north of the equator, which is the most northerly place on
Earth, receiving direct sunlight during the Northern Hemisphere’s summer. Remember that the earth is tilted 23.5
degrees, which accounts for seasonal variations in climate. The Tropic of Capricorn is the parallel at 23.5 degrees
south of the equator and is the most southerly location on Earth, receiving direct sunlight during the Southern
Hemisphere’s summer.

The tropics (Cancer and Capricorn) are the two imaginary lines directly above which the sun shines on the two
solstices, which occur on or near June 20 or 21 (summer solstice in the Northern Hemisphere) and December 21
or 22 (winter solstice in the Northern Hemisphere). The sun is directly above the Tropic of Cancer at noon on
June 20 or 21, marking the beginning of summer in the Northern Hemisphere and the beginning of winter in the
Southern Hemisphere. The sun is directly above the Tropic of Capricorn at noon on December 21 or 22, marking
the beginning of winter in the Northern Hemisphere and the beginning of summer in the Southern Hemisphere.
Solstices are the extreme ends of the seasons, when the line of direct sunlight is either the farthest north or the
farthest south that it ever goes. The region between the Tropics of Cancer and Capricorn is known as the tropics.
This area does not experience dramatic seasonal changes because the amount of direct sunlight received does not
vary widely. The higher latitudes (north of the Tropic of Cancer and south of the Tropic of Capricorn) experience
significant seasonal variation in climate.

The Arctic Circle is a line of latitude at 66.5 degrees north. It is the farthest point north that receives sunlight
during its winter season (90 N − 23.5 = 66.5 N). During winter, the North Pole is away from the sun and
does not receive much sunlight. At times, it is dark for most of the twenty-four-hour day. During the Northern
Hemisphere’s summer, the North Pole faces more toward the sun and may receive sunlight for longer portions of
the twenty-four-hour day. The Antarctic Circle is the corresponding line of latitude at 66.5 degrees south. It is the
farthest location south that receives sunlight during the winter season in the Southern Hemisphere (90 S − 23.5 =
66.5 S). When it is winter in the north, it is summer in the south.

The Arctic and Antarctic Circles mark the extremities (southern and northern, respectively) of the polar day
(twenty-four-hour sunlit day) and the polar night (twenty-four-hour sunless night). North of the Arctic Circle, the
sun is above the horizon for twenty-four continuous hours at least once per year and below the horizon for twenty-
four continuous hours at least once per year. This is true also near the Antarctic Circle, but it occurs south of the
Antarctic Circle, toward the South Pole. Equinoxes, when the line of direct sunlight hits the equator and days and
nights are of equal length, occur in the spring and fall on or around March 20 or 21 and September 22 or 23.
