A region is a basic unit of study in geography—a unit of space characterized by a feature such as a common
government, language, political situation, or landform. A region can be a formal country governed by political
boundaries, such as France or Canada; a region can be defined by a landform, such as the drainage basin of
all the water that flows into the Mississippi River; and a region can even be defined by the area served by a
shopping mall. Cultural regions can be defined by similarities in human activities, traditions, or cultural attributes.
Geographers use the regional unit to map features of particular interest, and data can be compared between regions
to help understand trends, identify patterns, or assist in explaining a particular phenomenon.

Regions are traditionally defined by internal characteristics that provide a sense of place. Their boundaries vary
with the type of region, whether it is formal, functional, or vernacular; each type has its own meaning and defined
purpose. A formal region has a governmental, administrative, or political boundary and can have political as well
as geographic boundaries that are not open to dispute or debate. Formal boundaries can separate states, provinces,
or countries from one another. Physical regions can be included within formal boundaries, such as the Rocky
Mountains or New England. An official boundary, such as the boundary of a national park, can be considered a
formal boundary. School districts, cities, and county governments have formal boundaries.

Natural physical geographic features have a huge influence on where political boundaries of formal regions are
set. If you look at a world map, you will recognize that many political boundaries are natural features, such as
rivers, mountain ranges, and large lakes. For example, between the United States and Mexico, the Rio Grande
makes up a portion of the border. Likewise, between Canada and the United States, a major part of the eastern
border is along the Saint Lawrence Seaway and the Great Lakes. Alpine mountain ranges in Europe create borders,
such as the boundary between Switzerland and Italy.

While geographic features can serve as convenient formal borders, political disputes will often flare up in adjacent
areas, particularly if valuable natural or cultural resources are found within the geographic features. Oil drilling
near the coast of a sovereign country, for example, can cause a dispute between countries about which one has
dominion over the oil resources. The exploitation of offshore fisheries can also be disputed. A Neolithic mummy
of a man who died in 3300 BCE caused tension between Italy and Switzerland: the body was originally taken to
Innsbruck, Switzerland, but when it was determined that the body was found about 90 meters (180 feet) inside the
border of Italy, Italian officials laid claim to the body.

Functional regions have boundaries related to a practical function within a given area. When the function of an
area ends, the functional region ends and its boundaries cease to exist. For example, a functional region can be
defined by a newspaper service or delivery area. If the newspaper goes bankrupt, the functional region no longer
exists. Church parishes, shopping malls, and business service areas are other examples of functional regions. They
function to serve a region and may have established boundaries for limits of the area to which they will provide
service. An example of a common service area—that is, a functional region—is the region to which a local pizza
shop will deliver.

Vernacular regions have loosely defined boundaries based on people’s perceptions or thoughts. Vernacular
regions can be fluid—that is, different people may have different opinions about the limits of the regions.
Vernacular regions include concepts such as the region called the “Middle East.” Many people have a rough idea
of the Middle East’s location but do not know precisely which countries make up the Middle East. Also, in the
United States, the terms Midwest or South have many variations. Each individual might have a different idea
about the location of the boundaries of the South or the Midwest. Whether the state of Kentucky belongs in the
Midwest or in the South might be a matter of individual perception. Similarly, various regions of the United States
have been referred to as the Rust Belt, Sun Belt, or Bible Belt without a clear definition of their boundaries. The
limit of a vernacular area is more a matter of perception than of any formally agreed-upon criteria. Nevertheless,
most people would recognize the general area being discussed when using one of the vernacular terms in a
conversation.
