Universal Time (UT), Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), Greenwich Mean Time (GMT), or Zulu Time (Z): all
four terms can be defined as local time at 0 degrees longitude, which is the prime meridian (location of Greenwich,
England). This is the same time under which many military operations, international radio broadcasts, and air
traffic control systems operate worldwide. UTC is set in zero- to twenty-four-hour time periods, as opposed to two
twelve-hour time periods (a.m. and p.m.). The designations of a.m. and p.m. are relative to the central meridian:
a.m. refers to ante meridiem, or “before noon,” and p.m. refers to post meridiem, or “after noon.” UT, UTC, GMT,
and Z all refer to the same twenty-four-hour time system that assists in unifying a common time in regard to global
operations. For example, all air flights use the twenty-four-hour time system so the pilots can coordinate flights
across time zones and around the world.

The earth rotates on its axis once every twenty-four hours at the rate of 15 degrees per hour (15 × 24 = 360). Time
zones are established roughly every 15 degrees longitude so that local times correspond to similar hours of day
and night. With this system, the sun is generally overhead at noon in every time zone that follows the 15-degree-
wide system. The continental United States has four main time zones.

The eastern standard time zone is five hours earlier than the time at the prime meridian (UTC) because it is about
75 degrees west of 0 degrees (5 × 15 = 75). For example, if it is noon in London, then it is 7 a.m. in New York.
If it is 1 p.m. in New York, it is 10 a.m. in San Francisco, which is three times zones to the west. Since there are
twenty-four hours in a day, there are twenty-four time zones on Earth. Each time zone is 15 degrees wide.

A problem with the 15-degree time zones is that the zones do not necessarily follow state, regional, or local
boundaries. The result is that time zones are seldom exactly 15 degrees wide and usually have varied boundary
lines. In the United States, the boundaries between the different time zones are inconsistent with the lines of
longitude; in some cases, time zones zigzag to follow state lines or to keep cities within a single time zone. Other
countries address the problem differently. China, for example, is as large in land area as the United States yet
operates on only one time zone for the entire country.
