Geography is the spatial study of the earth’s surface (from the Greek geo, which means “Earth,” and graphein,
which means “to write”). Geographers study the earth’s physical characteristics, its inhabitants and cultures,
phenomena such as climate, and the earth’s place within the universe. Geography examines the spatial
relationships between all physical and cultural phenomena in the world. Geographers also look at how the earth,
its climate, and its landscapes are changing due to cultural intervention.

The first known use of the word geography was by Eratosthenes of Cyrene (modern-day Libya in North Africa),
an early Greek scholar who lived between 276 and 194 BCE. He devised one of the first systems of longitude
and latitude and calculated the earth’s circumference. Additionally, he created one of the first maps of the world
based on the available knowledge of the time. Around the same time, many ancient cultures in China, southern
Asia, Polynesia, and the Arabian Peninsula also developed maps and navigation systems used in geography and
cartography.

The discipline of geography can be broken down into two main areas of focus: physical geography and human
geography. These two main areas are similar in that they both use a spatial perspective, and they both include the
study of place and the comparison of one place with another.

Physical geography is the spatial study of natural phenomena that make up the environment, such as rivers,
mountains, landforms, weather, climate, soils, plants, and any other physical aspects of the earth’s surface.
Physical geography focuses on geography as a form of earth science. It tends to emphasize the main physical
parts of the earth—the lithosphere (surface layer), the atmosphere (air), the hydrosphere (water), and the biosphere
(living organisms)—and the relationships between these parts.

The major forms of study within physical geography include the following: 
Geomorphology (the study of the earth’s surface features),
Glaciology (the study of glaciers),
Coastal geography (the study of the coastal regions),
Climatology (the study of climates and climate change),
Biogeography (the study of the geographic patterns of species distribution).

Some physical geographers study the earth’s place in the solar system. Others are environmental geographers,
part of an emerging field that studies the spatial aspects and cultural perceptions of the natural environment.
Environmental geography requires an understanding of both physical and human geography, as well as an
understanding of how humans conceptualize their environment and the physical landscape.

Physical landscape is the term used to describe the natural terrain at any one place on the planet. The natural
forces of erosion, weather, tectonic plate action, and water have formed the earth’s physical features. Many
US state and national parks attempt to preserve unique physical landscapes for the public to enjoy, such as
Yellowstone, Yosemite, and the Grand Canyon.

Human geography is the study of human activity and its relationship to the earth’s surface. Human geographers
examine the spatial distribution of human populations, religions, languages, ethnicities, political systems,
economics, urban dynamics, and other components of human activity. They study patterns of interaction between
human cultures and various environments and focus on the causes and consequences of human settlement and
distribution over the landscape. While the economic and cultural aspects of humanity are primary focuses of
human geography, these aspects cannot be understood without describing the landscape on which economic and
cultural activities take place.

The cultural landscape is the term used to describe those parts of the earth’s surface that have been altered
or created by humans. For example, the urban cultural landscape of a city may include buildings, streets,
signs, parking lots, or vehicles, while the rural cultural landscape may include fields, orchards, fences, barns,
or farmsteads. Cultural forces unique to a given place—such as religion, language, ethnicity, customs, or
heritage—influence the cultural landscape of that place at a given time. The colors, sizes, and shapes of the
cultural landscape usually symbolize some level of significance regarding societal norms. Spatial dynamics assist
in identifying and evaluating cultural differences between places.

Traditionally, the field of cartography, or map making, has been a vital discipline for geographers. While
cartography continues to be an extremely important part of geography, geographers also look at spatial (space)
and temporal (time) relationships between many types of data, including physical landscape types, economies,
and human activity. Geography also examines the relationships between and the processes of humans and
their physical and cultural environments. Because maps are powerful graphic tools that allow us to illustrate
relationships and processes at work in the world, cartography and geographic information systems have become
important in modern sciences. Maps are the most common method of illustrating different spatial qualities, and
geographers create and use maps to communicate spatial data about the earth’s surface.

Geospatial techniques are tools used by geographers to illustrate, manage, and manipulate spatial data.
Cartography is the art and science of making maps, which illustrate data in a spatial form and are invaluable in
understanding what is going on at a given place at a given time.4 

Making maps and verifying a location have become more exact with the development of the global positioning
system (GPS). A GPS unit can receive signals from orbiting satellites and calculate an exact location in latitude
and longitude, which is helpful for determining where one is located on the earth or for verifying a point on a
map. GPS units are standard equipment for many transportation systems and have found their way into products
such as cell phones, handheld computers, fish finders, and other mobile equipment. GPS technology is widely
implemented in the transport of people, goods, and services around the world.

Remote sensing technology acquires data about the earth’s surface through aerial photographs taken from
airplanes or images created from satellites orbiting the earth. Remotely sensed images allow geographers to
identify, understand, or explain a particular landscape or determine the land use of a place. These images can
serve as important components in the cartographic (map-making) process. These technologies provide the means
to examine and analyze changes on the earth’s surface caused by natural or human forces. Google Earth is an
excellent example of a computer tool that illustrates remotely sensed images of locations on the earth.

Geographic information science (GIS), often referred to as geographic information systems, uses a computer
program to assimilate and manage many layers of map data, which then provide specific information about a
given place. GIS data are usually in digital form and arranged in layers. The GIS computer program can sort6 World Regional Geography
or analyze layers of data to illustrate a specific feature or activity. GIS programs are used in a wide range of
applications, from determining the habitat range of a particular species of bird to mapping the hometowns of
university students.

GIS specialists often create and analyze geographical information for government agencies or private businesses.
They use computer programs to take raw data to develop the information these organizations need for making vital
decisions. For example, in business applications, GIS can be used to determine a favorable location for a retail
store based on the analysis of spatial data layers such as population distribution, highway or street arrangements,
and the locations of similar stores or competitive establishments. GIS can integrate a number of maps into one to
help analysts understand a place in relation to their own specific needs.

GIS also focuses on storing information about the earth (both cultural and natural) in computer databases that
can be retrieved and displayed in the form of specialized maps for specific purposes or analyses. GIS specialists
require knowledge about computer and database systems. Over the last two decades, GIS has revolutionized the
field of cartography: nearly all cartography is now done with the assistance of GIS software. Additionally, analysis
of various cultural and natural phenomena through the use of GIS software and specialized maps is an important
part of urban planning and other social and physical sciences. GIS can also refer to techniques used to represent,
analyze, and predict spatial relationships between different phenomena.

Geography is a much broader field than many people realize. Most people think of area studies as the whole of
geography. In reality, geography is the study of the earth, including how human activity has changed it. Geography
involves studies that are much broader than simply understanding the shape of the earth’s landforms. Physical
geography involves all the planet’s physical systems. Human geography incorporates studies of human culture,
spatial relationships, interactions between humans and the environment, and many other areas of research that
involve the different subspecialties of geography. Students interested in a career in geography would be well
served to learn geospatial techniques and gain skills and experience in GIS and remote sensing, as they are the
areas within geography where employment opportunities have grown the most over the past few decades.
