World regional geography studies various world regions as they compare with the rest of the world. Factors for
comparison include both the physical and the cultural landscape. The main questions are, Who lives there? What
are their lives like? What do they do for a living? Physical factors of significance can include location, climate
type, and terrain. Human factors include cultural traditions, ethnicity, language, religion, economics, and politics.

World regional geography focuses on regions of various sizes across the earth’s landscape and aspires to
understand the unique character of regions in terms of their natural and cultural attributes. Spatial studies can
play an important role in regional geography. The scientific approach can focus on the distribution of cultural and
natural phenomena within regions as delimited by various natural and cultural factors. The focus is on the spatial
relationships within any field of study, such as regional economics, resource management, regional planning, and
landscape ecology.

Again, this textbook takes a regional approach with a focus on themes that illustrate the globalization process,
which in turn helps us better understand our global community. The regions studied in world regional geography
can be combined into larger portions called realms. Realms are large areas of the planet, usually with multiple
regions, that share the same general geographic location. Regions are cohesive areas within each realm. The
following eleven realms are outlined in this text:

1. Europe (Eastern Europe and Western Europe)
2. The Russian Realm (Russian republic of the former Soviet Union)
3. North America (United States and Canada)
4. Middle America (Caribbean, Mexico, Central America)
5. South America
6. North Africa, the Middle East and central Asia
7. Subsaharan Africa (Africa south of the Sahara Desert)
8. Southern Asia (India and its neighbors)
9. Eastern Asia (China, Mongolia, Japan, and the Koreas)
10. Southeast Asia (mainland region and the islands region)
11. Australia and the Pacific (including New Zealand)
