The earth’s ability to receive and absorb sunlight is a primary factor in the earth’s environment, and it also has
a big impact on human populations. There are no large cities or human communities in Antarctica because it is
so cold; most of the sunlight filtering down to Antarctica is reflected off the earth at that latitude because of the
tilt of the earth’s axis and the resulting angle of incoming solar radiation. Answering the basic questions of where
most humans live on Earth and why they live there depends on understanding climate. Moderate type C climates
usually provide the greatest opportunities for human habitation.

Since the region between the Tropic of Cancer and the Tropic of Capricorn receives the most direct sunlight
throughout the year, it is favorable to plant and animal life, provided there is adequate moisture or precipitation.
Humans have been living in the tropics for a long time, even when the ice sheets were covering parts of the
midlatitudes. The problem with the tropics is that the soils are usually of poor quality and the nutrients have been
leached out. Today, when we look at the earth and the distribution of human population, two main factors attract
human habitation: moderate climates and access to water.

More than 70 percent of the earth’s surface is covered with water. The only problem is that less than 3 percent
of the water is fresh, and most of that fresh water is stored in ice caps at the North or South Pole. This leaves
less than 1 percent of the world’s fresh water for human use, usually in lakes, rivers, streams, or groundwater and
underground aquifers. Climate plays an important role in where humans live because precipitation is necessary
for growing crops, raising livestock, and supplying fresh water to urban communities.

Several geographers have developed categories to identify climate types. Climate can be defined as a long-term
average weather pattern evident in a particular region of the world. Weather is a term usually used to define
conditions on a short-term or even daily basis. The two main elements in climate conditions are temperature and
precipitation. For the purposes of this overview of world geography, the various climate types have been broken
down into six basic types—A, B, C, D, E, and H—after the Köppen-Geiger classification system. Type H climates
are actually a subset of the type E climate category.

Type A: Tropical or equatorial climates
Type B: Dry or arid climates
Type C: Moderate or temperate climates
Type D: Cold or continental climates
Type E: Polar or extreme climates
Type H: (Unclassified) highland climates
