Climate change has been a constant activity in the planet’s evolution. The increase in temperature in our
environment is the activity that has gained the most attention in recent years. Questions have been raised about
the rate and extent of climate change around the world. Understanding the dynamics of the temperature increase
can assist in understanding how it is related to human activity.

The atmosphere is the gaseous layer that surrounds the earth and marks the transition between its surface and
space. The atmosphere consists of a mixture of gases, composed of nitrogen (77 percent), oxygen (21 percent),
and minor elements (1 percent) including argon, helium, carbon dioxide, and water vapor. The small amount of
carbon dioxide is a critical component in the control of the earth’s temperature. The atmosphere extends over three
hundred miles above the earth’s surface, and the lower level makes up the earth’s climatic system. This lowest
level is called the troposphere and is responsible for the conditions that allow life to exist on the planet’s surface.

Since the 1960s, scientists have been concerned about the concentrations of carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous
oxide, and chlorofluorocarbons in the atmosphere. These so-called greenhouse gases can trap heat energy emitted
from the earth’s surface and may increase global temperatures and cause climate change. Since the Industrial
Revolution, human activity—the burning of fossil fuels and large-scale deforestation—has increased the amount
of heat-trapping greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. Carbon dioxide and similar gases act like the glass panels
of a greenhouse that allow shortwave radiation from the sun to enter but do not allow the long-wave radiation of
heat to escape into space.

An increase in carbon dioxide and greenhouse gases in the atmosphere will normally cause an increase in the
temperature of the planet’s climate, which in turn may cause changes in weather conditions in various places
on Earth. Temperature changes may affect precipitation patterns and alter weather patterns, which may affect
agricultural outputs and influence energy needs that can create increasing economic instability. Changes in climate
also impact environmental conditions for organisms adapted to specific habitat ranges. When climates change, an
organism’s habitable zone may also change, which in turn can impact entire ecosystems.

Deforestation and the burning of fossil fuels can contribute to climate change. Fossil fuels such as coal, oil, and
natural gas are created when dead plant and animal life are under pressure, decay for long periods, and retain
their carbon component. Burning fossil fuels releases the carbon back into the atmosphere. The increasing need
for energy and lumber by human activity will continue to contribute to climate change unless alternatives can be
found. The increase in temperatures may result in the melting of the ice caps, which in turn may raise sea levels,
impacting human activity around the world. More information about climate change is included in chapter 13 on
Antarctica.
