The planet’s growing population has increased demands on natural resources, including forest products. Humans
have been using trees for firewood, building homes, and making tools for millennia. Trees are a renewable
resource, but deforestation occurs when they are removed faster than they can be replenished. Most people in
rural areas in developing countries rely on firewood to cook their food. Many of these areas are experiencing a
fast decline in the number of trees available. People living in mainly type B climates may not have access to a
lot of trees to start with; therefore, when trees are cut down for firewood or for building materials, deforestation
occurs. In the tropical areas, it is common for hardwood trees to be cut down for lumber to gain income or to clear
the land for other agricultural purposes, such as cattle ranching. Countries that lack opportunities and advantages
look to exploit their natural resources—in this case, trees—for either subsistence agriculture or economic gain.
Deforestation has increased across the globe with the rapid rise in worldwide population.

During the Industrial Revolution, European countries chopped down their forests at a rapid rate. Much of the
British Isles was forested at one point, but today few forests remain on the British Isles, and they are typically
protected. Colonialism brought the Europeans to the Americas. The United States, in its early development,
pushed west from the original thirteen colonies, and many old growth forests were cut down in the process. As
railroad tracks were laid down and pioneer development pushed west into the Great Plains, where there were few
trees, the great cutover occurred in the eastern and central forests—cutover is a term indicating the systematic
deforestation of the eastern and central forests. Michigan and Wisconsin saw their trees removed in a systematic
deforestation.
Some areas were allowed to grow back, but many other areas were turned into farmland. Few old-growth forests
remain in the United States. Today there are conflicts over how the timber industry is handling the forests in places
such as the Pacific Northwest region of the United States.

Countries that are better off economically no longer have to cut down their own trees but can afford to substitute
other resources or import lumber from other places. Developing regions of the world in Latin America, Africa,
and parts of Asia are experiencing serious problems with deforestation. Deforestation is widespread: Residents of
Haiti have cut down about 99 percent of the country’s forests; most of the wood has been used as fuel to cook
food. People in Afghanistan have cut down about 70 percent of their forests. Nigeria has lost about 80 percent of
its old-growth forests since 1990. Ethiopia has lost up to 98 percent of its forested acreage, and the Philippines
has lost about 80 percent of its forests.

Brazil’s Amazon basin has undergone many projects that have driven deforestation. For example, about half the
state of Rondônia in western Brazil has been deforested since 1990. The countries of Central America have lost
about half their original forests, and deforestation continues on a systematic basis. Tropical regions of Southeast
Asia and Africa are being exploited for their timber at unsustainable rates, causing deforestation that the next
generation will have to deal with. India, with over a billion people, still has a high demand for firewood and
building materials; their forests are declining faster than they can be replanted. China, with its billion plus
population, has been attempting to address its deforestation problems by implementing a massive replanting
program and conservation measures. Other countries are starting to adopt similar measures.

Tropical rain forests only make up about 5 percent of the earth’s surface but contain up to 50 percent of the earth’s
biodiversity. These forests are cut down for a variety of reasons. Norman Meyers, a British environmentalist,
estimated that about 5 percent of deforestation in tropical regions is caused by the push for cattle production.
Nineteen percent of these forests are cut down by the timber industry, 22 percent are cut down for the expansion
of plantation agriculture, and 54 percent are removed due to slash-and-burn farming. Most tropical rain forests
are located in the Amazon basin of South America, in central Africa, and in Southeast Asia. All these areas are
looking for advantages and opportunities to boost their economies; unfortunately, they often target their tropical
rain forests as a revenue source.
