The dry type B climate is exemplified by the earth’s desert regions. Temperatures can be extreme, with little
precipitation. Type B climate regions experience low rainfall and high temperatures during the day and cooler
temperatures at night or during the winter season. Terrain in type B climates can range from sand deserts to prairie
grasslands or steppes. Type B climates have fewer trees than most other climate areas.

There is a direct relationship between highlands and type B climates in various places in the world. This climate
condition, known as the rain shadow effect, or more accurately, the precipitation shadow effect, occurs when one
side of a mountain range receives abundant rainfall while the region on the other side of the mountain range is
a desert or has more arid climate conditions. This phenomenon is evident wherever there is terrain with enough
elevation to restrict the movement of precipitation-bearing clouds.

Rain shadows are created when prevailing winds carrying moisture rise quickly in elevation up a mountainside,
where the air cools and condenses to precipitate out its moisture in the form of rain or snow. By the time the air
mass hits the top of the mountain, its moisture is much reduced. The dried air rushes down the other side of the
mountain range, where it increases in temperature. The warm, dry air coming off the mountains continues to pull
moisture out of the land, resulting in desert or arid climate conditions.

The Hawaiian island of Kauai has an extreme example of the rain shadow effect. The island’s windward side
receives more rain than almost any other place on Earth: as much as 460 inches (almost 40 feet) a year. Only a
part of the island, however, receives that amount of rain. The height of the mountains causes a rain shadow on the
dry leeward side, creating semidesert conditions and type B climates.

Death Valley in California is also a result of the rain shadow effect. Little rain falls on Death Valley because any
moisture in the prevailing winds falls on the western side of the bordering mountain ranges. The whole state of
Nevada is dry because of the rain shadow effect. All the rain coming off the Pacific Ocean falls on the coastal
mountains and the Sierra Nevada in California. The mountains are high enough to shadow that region of Nevada,
and the basin and ranges further the rain shadow effect on a local basis.

On the other side of the earth, the Himalayas are an excellent example of mountains that create the rain shadow
effect. Most of western China has type B climates because of the rain shadow effect caused by high mountains
that stop rain clouds from ever reaching the region. The southern side of the Himalayas receives extensive rainfall
because of monsoon rains arriving from the Indian Ocean, but western China is essentially a desert. It is sparsely
inhabited compared with the high-density regions in China Proper to the east, where rainfall is plentiful.
