Deforestation causes more than the loss of trees for fuel, building materials, paper products, or manufacturing.
Another related issue in the deforestation equation is soil erosion. Without the trees to hold the soil during heavy
rains, soils are eroded away, leaving the ground in an unproductive state. In tropical areas, soils are often degraded
and lack nutrients. Most of the nutrients in the tropical areas rest in decaying material at the base of the trees
that supplies energy back into the ecosystem. Once the trees are removed, there is little replenishing of this
energy supply. Soil erosion in tropical areas makes it hard for forests to grow back once they have been removed.
Landslides can be a more severe component of the soil erosion problem. After heavy rainfall, entire hillsides
saturated with water can slide downward, causing serious structural damage to buildings, homes, and agricultural
plots. Tree roots help hold hillsides together and therefore help prevent landslides.

Forests play an important role in the water cycle. Trees pull up moisture with their roots from the soil and transpire
it through their leaves back into the atmosphere. Moisture in the atmosphere collects into clouds, condenses, and
falls back to Earth. Not only do trees store water, but organic matter at the base of the trees also stores water and
makes it available to the larger ecosystem, which may slow down water runoff. Forest canopies disperse water
during rainfall and create another layer of moisture in their leaves and branches, which either is used by other
organisms or evaporates back into the atmosphere. Deforestation eliminates the role that forests play in the water
cycle.

Forest ecosystems provide for a diverse community of organisms. Tropical rain forests are one of the most vibrant
ecosystems on the planet. Their abundant biodiversity can provide insight into untapped solutions for the future.
Plants and organisms in these habitats may hold the key to medical or biological breakthroughs, but wildlife
and vegetation will be lost as deforestation eliminates their habitat and accelerates the extinction of endangered
species.

Trees and plants remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and store it in the plant structure through the
process of photosynthesis. Carbon dioxide is a major greenhouse gas that is a part of the climate change process.
Carbon dioxide and other similar gases reduce the amount of long-wave radiation (heat) that escapes from the
earth’s atmosphere, resulting in increased temperatures on the planet. As more carbon dioxide is emitted into
the atmosphere, climate change occurs. The removal of trees through deforestation results in less carbon dioxide
being removed from the atmosphere, which contributes to climate change. Slash-and-burn farming methods that
burn forests release the carbon in the plant life directly into the atmosphere, increasing the climate change effect.
