The following terms are used to describe language characteristics.

An accent is the pronunciation of words within a language that is different from that used by a
different group of the same language. For example, people in Mississippi pronounce words differently from
people in North Dakota, but the differences are less severe than dialects.

Similar to pidgin, a creole language arises from contact between two other languages and has
features of both. However, Creole is a pidgin that becomes a primary language spoken by people at home.
Creole languages are often developed in colonial settings as a dialect of the colonial language (usually
French or English). For example, in the former French colony of Haiti, a French-based creole language was
developed that is spoken by people at home, while French is typically used for professional purposes.

A dead language is one that is no longer used for local communication. For example, Latin
is no longer used by local people to communicate but is still used by the Roman Catholic Church in some of
its services.

A dialect is a regional variety of a language that uses different grammar or pronunciation. Examples
include American English versus British English. Linguists suggest that there are three main dialects of the
English language in the United States: a Southern dialect, a midland dialect, and a Northern dialect.
Television and public media communication has brought a focus on more uniform speech patterns that have
diminished the differences between these three dialects.

An isolated language is one not connected to any other language on Earth. For example,
Basque is not connected to any other language and is only spoken in the region of the Pyrenees between
Spain and France.

A lingua franca is a second language used for commercial purposes with others outside a
language group but not used in personal lives. For example, Swahili is used by millions in Africa for doing
business with people outside their own group but is not used to communicate within local communities.

The official language is the language that is on record by a country to be used for all its
official government purposes. For example, in India the official language is Hindi, though in many places
the lingua franca is English and several local languages may be spoken.

A pidgin is a simplified, created language used to communicate between two or more groups that do
not have a language in common. For example, Residents of New Guinea mix English words with their own
language to create a new language that can bridge speakers of different local language groups. Though the
words are in English, the grammar and sentence structure is mixed up according to local vocabulary. There
are many English-based pidgin languages around the world.

Slang is the local use of informal words or phrases that are not part of the official language. For
example, a lot of musicians use slang in their lyrics.
