Language is the communication mode of human culture, and it represents the complete diversity of thought,
literature, and the arts. All the billions of people on the planet speak at least one language. While Ethnologue,
a publication pertaining to the world’s languages, estimates that there were 6,909 living languages in the world
as of 2009, the exact number may never be determined. Other data sets count languages differently, but most
agree that there are more than 6,000. There are even communities in various parts of the world where people can
communicate by whistling messages to each other or by using clicking sounds.

Of the more than 6,000 languages, about a dozen are spoken by more than one hundred million people each.
These are the world’s main languages used in the most populous countries. However, the vast majority of the
world’s languages are spoken by a relatively small number of people. In fact, many languages have no written
form and are spoken by declining numbers of people. Language experts estimate that up to half the world’s living
languages could be lost by the end of the twenty-first century as a result of globalization. New languages form
when populations live in isolation, and in the current era, as the world’s populations are increasingly interacting
with each other, languages are being abandoned and their speakers are switching to more useful tongues.

There are nine dominant language families in the world. Each of the languages within a language family shares a
common ancestral language. An example of a language family is the Indo-European family, which has a number
of branches of language groups that come from the same base: a language called Proto-Indo-European that was
probably spoken about six thousand years ago. As populations migrated away from the ancestral homeland,
their language evolved and separated into many new languages. The three largest language groups of the Indo-
European family used in Europe are the Germanic, Romance, and Slavic groups. Other Indo-European languages
include Hindi (spoken in India) and Persian (spoken in Iran).
