Religious geography is the study of the distribution of religions and their relationship to their place of origin.
Religious geographers recognize three main types of religions: universal (or universalizing), ethnic (or cultural),
and tribal (or traditional) religions. Universal religions include Christianity, Islam, and various forms of
Buddhism. These religions attempt to gain worldwide acceptance and appeal to all types of people, and they
actively look for new members, or converts. Ethnic religions appeal to a single ethnic group or culture. These
religions do not actively seek out converts. Broader ethnic religions include Judaism, Shintoism, Hinduism, and
Chinese religions that embrace Confucianism and Taoism. Finally, traditional religions involve the belief in some
form of supernatural power that people can appeal to for help, including ancestor worship and the belief in spirits
that live in various aspects of nature, such as trees, mountaintops, and streams (this is often called animism).
Subsaharan Africa is home to many traditional religions.

Although the world’s primary religions are listed here, many other religions are practiced around the world, as
well as many variations of the religions outlined here. The top four religions by population are Christianity, Islam,
Hinduism, and Buddhism. Because the official doctrine of Communism was nonreligious or atheist, there are
actually many more followers of Buddhism in China than demographic listings indicate. The percentage of the
world’s population that follows Buddhism is probably much higher than the 6 percent often listed for this religion.

Christianity and Islam originated out of Judaism in the eastern Mediterranean and the Arabian
Peninsula. Both are monotheistic religions that look to the Jewish patriarch Abraham as a founding
personage. Christianity, based on the life and teachings of Jesus Christ, who lived in Palestine in the
first century CE, spread rapidly through the Roman Empire. Islam is based on the teachings of
Muhammad, a seventh-century religious and political figure who lived on the Arabian Peninsula. Islam
spread rapidly across North Africa, east across southern Asia, and north to Europe in the centuries after
Muhammad’s death.

Buddhism is a religion or way of life based on the teachings and life of Siddhartha Gautama, who lived
in what is now India/Nepal around the fifth century BCE. There are three main branches of Buddhism:
southern or Theravada Buddhism, eastern or Mahayana Buddhism, and northern or Vajrayana
(Tibetan) Buddhism.

Hinduism, a religious tradition that originated on the Indian subcontinent, is one of the oldest major
religions still practiced in the world, and it may date back to as far as 2000 BCE or earlier. Unlike
other world religions, Hinduism has no single founder and is a conglomerate of diverse beliefs and
traditions. Hinduism has a large body of scripture, including the Vedas, the Upanishads, and epic tales
such as the Mahabharata and the Ramayana.

Sikhism, a religion founded in the Punjab region of southern Asia, is a monotheistic religion centered
on justice and faith. High importance is placed on the principle of equality between all people. The
writings of former gurus are the basis for the religion.

Judaism is the religion of the Jewish people, whose traditions and ethics are embodied in the Jewish
religious texts, the Tanakh, and the Talmud. According to Jewish tradition, Judaism began with the
covenant between God and Abraham around 2000 BCE.

Shintoism is a major ethnic religion of Japan focused on the worship of kami, which are spirits of
places, things, and processes.

Confucianism and Taoism are ethnic Chinese religions based on morality and the teachings of religious
scholars such as Confucius.
