
        International Research in Geographical and
        Environmental Education
        ISSN: 1038-2046 (Print) 1747-7611 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rgee20
“If you went out it would stick”: Irish children's
learning in their local environments
Susan Pike
To cite this article: Susan Pike (2011) “If you went out it would stick”: Irish children's learning in
their local environments, International Research in Geographical and Environmental Education,
20:2, 139-159, DOI: 10.1080/10382046.2011.564787
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/10382046.2011.564787
         Published online: 04 May 2011.
         Submit your article to this journal
         Article views: 4876
         View related articles
         Citing articles: 7 View citing articles
                           Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at.
                

International Research in Geographical and Environmental Education
Vol. 20, No. 2, May 2011, 139–159
            “If you went out it would stick”: Irish children’s learning
                                      in their local environments
                                                Susan Pike
                        Education Department, St. Patrick’s College, Dublin, Ireland.
        This paper reports on the findings of a research project investigating children’s expe-
        riences of their local environments. Children’s experiences of spaces and places and
        the interaction of such experiences and their learning were investigated, using mixed
        research methods, informed by phenomenological and participatory methodologies.
        Through these activities including discussion, interviews and drawing, children de-
        scribed how they experienced affordances of spaces, places and people in a range of
        ways. The children also revealed varied and dynamic attitudes to their local environ-
        ments. Children’s use and opinions of the environment were influenced by temporal,
        physical, social and economic factors. As well as expressing that such local experiences
        enhanced their current lives, the children also described how experiences in their lo-
        cal environment contributed to the different areas of their development, including their
        learning. For most children, such experiences emanated from outside school, with learn-
        ing in geography in school more likely to be about places farther from home. These
        findings suggest that attempts to make children’s geographies in their local environ-
        ments central to primary geography through content and activities like many of those
        outlined in the Primary School Curriculum would be successful. The children’s views
        also suggest that the contributions of all children could be used in decision-making
        beyond schools. Such consideration and development of children’s geographies has the
        potential to contribute to children’s lives as active citizens, currently and in the future.
        Keywords: children’s geographies; geography education; Irish education; geography
        curriculum; primary geography; geography fieldwork.

Introduction
In recent years, there has been a growing interest in researching children’s lives (Aitken,
2001; Deegan, Devine, & Lodge, 2004; Greene & Hogan, 2005; James & Prout, 1997;
Qvortrup, Bardy, Sgritta, & Wintersberger, 1994), including their experiences of their
local environments (Chawla, 2002; Hart, 1997; Matthews, 1992; Spencer & Blades, 2006;
Tranter & Pawson, 2001). Such experiences appear to be important to children for a
number of reasons, including their current well-being as well as their cognitive and affective
development (Hart, 1979; Matthews, Limb, & Taylor, 2000; Moore, 1986; Punch, 2000;
Skelton, 2000). Although children’s lives have become an increasingly popular field of
research, it has been argued that there is much to discover about the “here and now” of
children’s experiences in their local environments (Matthews & Limb, 1999, p. 61).
      Recent research about children’s local environments has tended to be categorised within
the fields of “children’s geographies” and the “geography of children” (Catling, 2003;

  
ISSN: 1038-2046 print / 1747-7611 online
 2011 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/10382046.2011.564787

                                                S. Pike
                                                   social
                                               environment
                                                                        control
                         power
                                            direct
                                         experience
            systems                                 child       children’s
                                                               participative
                                far                            experiences             politicised
                                          children’s                        near
                                           personal
                                        geographical
                                         experiences                                          decisions
                                                      indirect
                                                    experience
        inequalities
                                                                                 built
                            natural                                          environment
                         environment
                                                  physical
                                                environment
                             Increasing recognition of children’s geographies
                         (including their engagement in geographical education)
   Children’s inhibited geographies                                   Children’s dynamic geographies
   Children as submissive citizens                                           Children as active citizens
   Children disempowered                                                          Children empowered
   Children as not-yet-people                                                       Children as people
Figure 1. Elements in children’s geographies. Source: Catling (2003, p. 172).
Matthews, 2003). To draw these categories together, this paper investigates children’s ex-
periences of their local environments and their learning, as illustrated by Catling in his
model shown in Figure 1 (2003, p. 172). Within the model, children’s geographies are
represented as a series of spheres, encompassing their experiences. In the top half of the
diagram, the child is portrayed within their immediate “world at hand”, encompassing their
direct experiences and their participation in communities. Also, within this sphere is the
“world beyond”, or children’s indirect experiences. Circulating these realms of experiences


           International Research in Geographical and Environmental Education              
are the influences, such as the local environment itself and the systems and structures of
society. The lower half of the diagram represents a continuum of the potential for recog-
nising children’s geographies; to the left is a situation where children’s geographies are not
recognised by the society, where children are inhibited, disempowered and submissive, and
furthermore where children are considered “not yet-persons”. To the right is a situation
where children’s dynamic geographies are recognised and developed by children becoming
empowered, active citizens within their local communities. In this way, Catling’s model
promotes the “agency” of children (Holloway & Valentine, 2000a; Matthews, 2003), gener-
ally described as “the capacity of individuals to act independently” (James & James, 2008,
p. 9). The model illustrates a continuum of children’s increasing independent engagement
with their local environment, including their learning at school, referred to in this paper as
children’s “local learning”.
    Emerging from Catling’s model in Figure 1, this paper will focus on the following
questions:
    • How do children use their local environments?
    • How do such experiences contribute to children’s learning?
    • What influences children’s experiences, including their learning about their local
       environments?
    • What are the implications for practice for the incorporation of children’s experiences
       into learning in geography?
Children’s experiences of their local environments
The study of children’s experiences in their localities has a relatively long tradition not
only influenced primarily from geography and psychology but also from other disciplines
(Matthews, 2003). Bunge and Bordessa’s (1975) investigations of children’s expeditions
found that the children were subject to structural oppression and subsequent spatial restric-
tions, especially for the poorest of children. Hart (1979) spent 18 months with the children
of a New England town focusing on their experiences in their local environment. De-
spite their common geographical focus, these studies drew different conclusions, as Bunge
and Bordessa’s work emphasised the structural forces at work on children’s experiences,
whereas Hart’s work emphasised children’s agency, in that they shaped their environment
as much as it shaped them. Although it has been found that the children explore their local
environments for the sake of it (Hart, 1979), space is generally used to access particular
places. Across the literature, it is consistently found that children will use the places that
are available and that they like. Research into children’s use of local places and their expe-
riences in their local environments has focused on the specific natural and built places that
children use in their local environments, including natural landscapes, such as woods and
rivers (Fjørtoft & Sageie, 2000; Olwig, 1993; Owens, 1988; Tunstall, Tapsell, & House,
2004), and human landscapes, such as parks and shopping centres (Hopkins, 1990; Skelton,
2000; Vanderbeck & Johnson, 2000). The Growing up in Cities (GuiC) project compared
children’s experiences spatially (in 11 countries) and temporally (in the 1970s and 1990s)
(Chawla, 2002; Lynch, 1977). Findings reflected previous studies, but the comparative
nature of the projects meant that differences along as ethnic, class and gender were more
apparent, with girls, those from ethnic minorities and middle-class children having least
freedom in their localities. Across all research in the field, the most consistent finding in
the research is that there is a value, including learning, in the use of the local environment.

                                        S. Pike
Education, curriculum and children’s environments
Educational theorists have noted the value of local learning: From a developmental per-
spective, Piaget valued children’s complex environmental interactions, as such interactions
contributed towards children’s intellectual development (Piaget & Inhelder, 1954). Socio-
constructivists have criticised constructivists for ignoring the social context of learning
(Bruner, 1986). Although still under-researched, there is evidence that children receive
cognitive and affective benefits from local learning (Blaut, 1991, 1997; Chawla, 2002;
Hart, 1992; Matthews, 1987). There is overwhelming evidence that teaching, using the
locality and appropriate resources, develops children’s spatial capabilities (Catling, 1998;
Walsh, 2006). Such awareness also develops where children have the opportunity for
unrestricted play, alone or with friends, in environments (Hart, 1979; Matthews, 1987).
Newer research evidence also reveals that when learning concepts in geography, children
are more likely to understand them if they are actively learning in environments (Nundy,
1999). Nundy (1999) found that the levels of understanding were significantly higher in
children carrying out fieldwork on rivers outdoors than a control group learning in the
classroom. There is also evidence that local learning, within a school context or not, brings
affective benefits to children, including positive attitudes to learning and developed self-
identity (Ballantyne & Packer, 2002; Biddulph & Adey, 2004; James, 1995; Matthews
et al., 2000; Scourfield & Davies, 2005; Scourfield, Dicks, Holland, Drakeford, & Davies,
2006).
    Drawing on research evidence, local learning has featured subsequent curricular in the
Republic of Ireland (RoI), including the 1971 CURACLAM NA BUNSCOILE (CnB) and
1999 Primary School Curriculum (PSC) (DES/NCCA, 1999a, 1999b; DoE, 1971a, 1971b).
The current geography programme aims to help children “make sense of their surround-
ings and the wider world . . . to learn about people and places and the inter-relationships
between them”, encompassing the development of both a “sense of space” and “a sense
of place” (DES/NCCA, 1999b, p. 6). Within the geography curriculum, a sense of space
refers to the understanding of and feeling for places, whereas a sense of place refers to
the identity of places, including local places, and developing an appreciation of what it
may be like to experience such places (DES/NCCA, 1999b, p. 9). Furthermore, the PSC
views children as members of local communities recognising the worth of children’s learn-
ing in a local context (DES/NCCA, 1999b), reflecting the established literature (Driskell,
2002; Hart, 1992; Heft & Chawla, 2006). Within Social, Personal and Health Education
(SPHE), reference is made to enhancing and deepening children’s experiences of, atti-
tudes to and participation in local communities (DES/NCCA, 1999d, 1999e). In geography,
there are opportunities for children to engage with local learning, expressing their ideas
and opinions about their locality (DES/NCCA, 1999b, 1999c). Although the PSC holds
progressive and active views of children, there are some shortcomings, as the concept of
participation in the PSC is limited to action within school (Waldron, 2004). Neverthe-
less, teaching and learning in primary geography is not just a product of the curriculum
but also of interpretation (Catling, 2003, p. 169). In the RoI, limited research evidence
suggests that following the introduction of the CnB, provision for child-centred creative
learning, including local learning, in the curriculum was not evident in classroom practice
(Gash, 1985). Limited evidence suggests that children’s experiences of primary geography
may be shaped more by requirements of school textbooks rather than by the curriculum
(Devine, 2003; Pike, 2006). Research indicates that actively learning about or within the
local environments is rarely experienced in schools (Devine, 2003; INTO, 1996; Pike,
2006).

            International Research in Geographical and Environmental Education               
Research methods
Drawing on a tradition of phenomenology to inform research in geography, the theoretical
basis of this project was the field of phenomenology, being a study of the essences of
children’s experiences (Merleau-Ponty, 1962, p. vii). Crucially, the research aimed to be
participatory, to allow participants the opportunity to “act, take part in, change and become
changed by the social and cultural world they live in” (Christensen & Prout, 2002, p. 481).
Therefore, the “mosaic approach” was drawn upon (Clark & Moss, 2001) to research the
lived experiences of children within a participatory process.
     The fieldwork for this research took place over the period from September 2005 to
June 2007 in state primary schools in Dublin City and Waterford County and City, as
outlined in Table 1. Initial data were collected from two rural schools in Waterford County
in September 2005, which indicated interesting dimensions to the children’s experience.
Therefore, a further selection of schools was made that were located in areas known to the
author (Huberman & Miles, 2002, p. 12) and were varied in the socio-economic profile of
their catchment and in ethos and nature. In these schools, the school principals, teachers
and children were willing to take part in the research. The choice of this range of schools
helped ensure external validity in the sample, whilst ensuring there was sufficient time to
gather meaningful data with each child (Robson, 2002).
     This research was carried out with pupils in fifth and sixth classes (aged 10–13 years).
In the two rural schools, the pupils in fifth and sixth classes were included in the project
as they were in multi-grade settings. The range of ages reflected the fact that children start
school at any age between 4 years and 5 years 11 months, depending on parental decisions
 Table 1. Schools and children participating in the study.
                        Description of                                       Number of children
 Name of school            school       Location/catchment   Number of       taking part in the
 Age of pupils        Location of school      of school     pupils in school        study
 Mountainview        Small,              Small village             85                 21
                        co-educational
 4–13 years          National school     Rural
 Seaview             Small,              Large village             72                 21
                        co-educational
 4–13 years          National school     Village/rural
 Bayside             Medium, mixed       Suburbs of town          221                 21
 4–13 years          Gaelscoil           Rural/village/town
 Hillside            Medium,             Rural                    192                 20
                        co-educational
 4–13 years          National school     Rural/suburbs of
                                           town
 Countryview         Large,              Rural                    553                 40
                        co-educational
 4–13 years          National school     Rural/suburbs/city
 City girls’         Large girls school  Inner city suburbs       291                 21
    school
 8–13 years          Senior national     City
                        school
 City boys’          Large boys          Inner city suburbs       258                 24
    school
 8–13 years          Senior national     City
                        school
  Names of schools have been changed.

                                          S. Pike
     Table 2. Examples of children’s ideas for the research process.
     Talk to us more.                  Get it drawn, write a bit, get us to TALK ABOUT IT!
     Draw maps.                        We could interview other people.
     Poster.                           Go on a walk around the village.
     Publish on cars.                  Draw it. Go on TV. Call a meeting.
     Ask us more questions.            Talk to younger children.
in the RoI. The gender breakdown in each of the co-educational schools was broadly evenly
split in each school, and when the children in the single-sex schools were accounted for,
the gender breakdown for all children was 95 (56.5%) boys to 73 (43.5%) girls. The vast
majority of children were both born in Ireland and considered themselves as Irish (92.9%).
Children living in rural or urban area were broadly evenly split, with 79 children (47%)
living in rural areas and 89 (53%) living in urban areas. Most children had lived in their
current locality for a relatively long time; 45% of the children had never moved, with a
further 29.4% of the children only having moved locally.
     In considering the methods most suitable for collecting information about their
experiences in their local environments, the children’s ideas were sought, as outlined on
Table 2 (Tilbury & Walford, 1996, p. 57), which included a variety of methods for finding
out opinions, reflecting the mosaic approach using mixed methods (Clark & Moss, 2001).
Such mixed research methods were evident in other studies of children’s localities, even if
not named as such (Hart, 1979; Nairn, Panelli, & McCormack, 2003; Punch, 2000; Skelton,
2000). It was hoped that the quantitative data would discover the patterns of the children’s
experiences and qualitative data would provide some reasons for the children’s experiences
(Huberman & Miles, 2002), with the chances of biases arising from over-reliance on one
method being minimised (Ennew & Morrow, 1994, p. 70; Morrow & Richards, 1996,
p. 101).
     The first activity for data collection was to invite the children to draw their local
environment (n = 133), an established technique in geography research (Lynch, 1977;
Matthews, 1992), rather than relying on writing and speaking (Backett-Milburn & McKie,
1999) (Table 3). The children also completed questionnaires on their experiences of and
attitudes to their local environment. The first of these was a multiple-choice, short response
questionnaire (SRQ) (n = 155) about their experiences in their local environment at home
and school. The SRQ fitted in with the findings of initial research and the research questions
regarding children’s experience in the local environment (Czaja & Blair, 1996). The second
of these was a long response questionnaire (LRQ) (n = 126) about their local environment
containing questions about children’s experiences in their local environment, used to collect
more open data than the SRQ. Focus group interviews (n = 112) were also designed to
collect the children’s verbal accounts to give the children space to explore the ideas they
had expressed (Kamberelis & Dimitriadis, 2005; Merton & Kendall, 1946). Interview
groups were “geographical” and friendship groups, as such groups were both supportive
and enabling for the children (Matthews & Tucker, 2000; Mayall, 2002; Tucker, 2003).
Complimenting the questionnaires and interviews were the children’s photographs (n =
102), helping to access their ideas of places, enabling features or places talked of to become
more visible (Punch, 2003).
     The range of data was processed by open coding, noting the themes in the children’s
activities (Corbin & Strauss, 1990). Codes included types of experiences and relationships
between learning and experiences, using a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet. Thereafter, purely
quantitative data sets were transferred to the Statistical Packages for the Social Sciences

             International Research in Geographical and Environmental Education                   

Table 3. Techniques used in the research process.
Technique (Grouping)                     Children’s activity             Researcher’s activity
Classroom discussion (Whole      Viewing and discussing            Introducing ideas of the
   class, friendship groups)        research material in groups       research
                                 Devising ideas for research       Providing examples of research
                                    process in pairs/groups        Asking for ideas about research
                                 Completing permission slip and       process
                                    asking for parental
                                    permission
Short response questionnaire     Completing questionnaire          Outlining task and inviting
   (Individual)                                                       children to take part
                                                                   Clarifying task and helping
                                                                      individuals
Pictoral representations of the  Drawing a pictoral                Outlining task and inviting
   present locality (Individual)    representation of their local     children to take part
                                    environment                    Clarifying task and helping
                                                                      individuals
Long responses questionnaire     Completing questionnaire          Outlining task and inviting
   (Individual)                                                       children to take part
                                                                   Clarifying task and helping
                                                                      individuals
Interview (Self-selected         Asking questions                  Outlining task and inviting
   friendship groups)            Answering questions                  children to take part
                                 Discussing with friends           Asking questions
                                                                   Managing discussions
Photography (Individual with     Taking photograph of their        Outlining task and inviting
   some pairings)                   local environment                 children to take part
                                 Writing responses about           Asking questions
                                    photograph
Pictoral representations of      Drawing a representation of       Outlining task and inviting
   future locality (Individual)     their local environment           children to take part
                                                                   Clarifying task and helping
                                                                      individuals
Feedback on study (Whole         Discussing findings               Outlining task and inviting
   class)                                                             children to take part
                                 Making suggestions                Presenting initial findings of
                                                                      research
(SPSS), to enable summary statistics and comparisons to be made to complement codes
(Robson, 2002). By considering the written and drawn data from each child individually, it
was evident that the quantitative data provided the patterns of the children’s experiences, but
that influences on their experiences were apparent through the qualitative data (Jick, 1979).
Findings
Children’s uses of their local environment included their movements through space and
their uses of places in their locality, as outlined in Table 4. In many ways, the children spoke
about their experiences as many before them, although children had contrasting experiences
(Chawla, 2002; Hart, 1979; Matthews, 1992, 2003; Spencer & Blades, 2006).
Children’s uses of local spaces
The children used a range of spaces in their locality to play, to meet up within or to travel
through to reach other spaces or places, as outlined in Table 5. Overall, 24.3% of the

                                            S. Pike
        Table 4. Children’s spaces and places in their local environments (n = 168).
        Natural spaces and places
        Natural                                                Built “green” areas
        • Beaches                                              • Dens
        • Fields                                               • Parks
        • Hills/mountains                                      • Public “greens”
        • Rivers                                               • Sports fields
        • Woods
        Built places spaces and places
        Commercial places                                      Community facilities
        • Bowling alleys                                       • Churches
        • Cinemas                                              • GAA/soccer clubs
        • Food outlets/restaurants                             • Swimming pools
        • Local shops/shopping centres                         • Tennis clubs
        • Swimming pools                                       • Youth clubs
        People
        Familiar people                                        Less familiar people
        • Family                                               • Adults, e.g. youth workers
        • Friends                                              • Children, e.g. younger
                                                                 children
        • Local residents                                      • Teenagers
        Source: All data.
children described using the space very close to their home, such as the street or common
area, with the majority (54.8%) of children using space in their immediate area, such as
the whole of their housing estate or their part of the town or city. A small proportion of
children (2.6%) had particularly large ranges, describing their use of the whole city or large
areas or the countryside. It was evident that the children’s experiences of local spaces were
related to who lived near to them (Costall, 1995; Hart, 1979; Matthews & Field, 2001;
Matthews et al., 2000; Newson & Newson, 1977; Punch, 2000; Skelton, 2000), with over
three quarters of children visiting friends and relatives at least once a week. In fact, there
were no statistically significant differences found using gender or location as variables
(gender/friends: p = 0.218, U = 2163.5, z = −1.231; gender/relatives: p = 0.406, U =
2253.0, z = −0.830; location/friends: p = 0.33, U = 1944.0, z = −2.136; location/relatives:
p = 0.164, U = 2190.5, z = 0.164), contrasting with earlier studies (Hart, 1979).
 Table 5. Children’s use of their local environment (n = 155).
 Percentage of
 children carrying out      At least once a      At least once a      Once a year or    Not near my
 this type of activity           week                month                  less            home
 Walking                         81.2                 90.6                   5.8              –
 Shops                           80.3                 88.3                   8.1             2.2
 Paths                           73.2                 78.3                   8.2             8.7
 Cycling                         68.9                 85.6                  11.5              –
 Roads                           59.3                 72.9                  20.8              –
 Public places                   53.9                 71.9                  18.0             5.8
 Fields                          48.2                 68.3                  19.5             6.5
 Woods                           24.5                 46.1                  38.8             5.8
 Playgrounds                     13.0                 40.7                  33.8            28.8
 Source: SRQ.

            International Research in Geographical and Environmental Education                      

     In terms of movement through space, the SRQ (n = 155) children frequently walked
and cycled around their local environments, with 81.2% of children questioned walking
and 88.9% cycling in their local area at least once a week. The most common reason for
using space in this way was to meet friends and/or relatives, as over three quarters (76%)
of children visited or met friends at least once a week, with 68.0% doing the same with
relatives. The proximity of others, particularly friends and relatives, appeared to direct
children’s uses of space in their local environment:
    Where my house is it’s really close to my cousin’s and my nanny’s house. So like, lots of times
    I might ring my cousin and say: “Do you want to go for a walk?” And like we’re close so we
    can go, together and it’s not noisy. (Girl, rural area, interviewed with her two female cousins)
     Whilst the majority of children used space frequently, there were differences within
groups of children in their choice of transport through space. For example, children in
urban areas were more likely to walk around their area, with children from rural areas
more likely to cycle. However, these differences were not statistically significant (walking:
p = 0.058, U = 1944.5, z = −1.894; cycling: p = 0.083, U = 1963.0, z = −1.736).
Using gender as a variable, fewer girls than boys either walked or cycled around their
local environments on a daily basis, though this was found to be statistically significant for
cycling but not for walking (walking: p = 0.451, U = 2211.5, z = −0.754; cycling: p =
0.570, U = 2249.0, z = −0.568). Interviews revealed complex patterns of use of space at
different times; children used their local environments both extensively and intensively.
     In all areas, children frequently used different spaces, reflecting the environment the
children resided in (Kyttä, 2006), with children in urban areas more likely to use the built
environment and children in rural areas more likely to use the natural environment spaces.
Of all the spaces and places used by the children, the most common were journeys to the
local shops. Although a shop is a place, rather than space, to the children the streets outside
shops or arcades within shopping centres were part of their local spaces, most often used
for “hanging out” in spaces near to the shop.
     The children used a range of local spaces, most commonly woods and fields, as can be
seen in Table 6. There were a large number of children who did not use natural spaces
such as woods (30%) and fields (17.3%), even though they were accessible to them,
reflecting previous findings (Matthews et al., 2000; Nairn et al., 2003). As with the children’s
ranges, there were temporal and seasonal variations in children’s use of local spaces, as not
such easily defined spaces such as pavements, streets and other areas of their immediate
neighbourhood were valued by children (Karsten, 2002; Karsten, Bongertman, de Haan,
Van Der Straaten, & Tom, 1995; Matthews, 2002; Moore, 1986; Owens, 1988), and this
  Table 6. Children’s weekly use of the natural and built environment (n = 155).
  Percentage of children using
  spaces and places                       Urban           Rural        Male        Female       All
  Shops                                    83.6           77.6         76.0         84.9       80.3
  Friend’s homes                           84.6           75.3         78.3         70.2       75.0
  Relative’s homes                        63.5            75.4         73.7         70.2       70.0
  Fields                                  35.5            58.5         53.4         42.4       48.2
  Woods                                   32.5            14.5         27.4         21.2       39.6
  Playgrounds                             16.2            10.4         16.5           9.1      13.0
  Source: SRQ.

                                           S. Pike
Figure 2. “The anti-adult corner”, boy, city. Source: child’s photograph.
pattern of space use, so different to how adults use space, was true of some of the children.
As these boys photographed (Figure 2) and described:
   Boy 1: There’s a place we hang around it’s called the AAC, the “anti-adult corner”. We just
   hang out there and play. We just were talking and we were messing because we were bored and
   we gave it a name.
   Boy 2: It’s our main hang out place. We send songs on our phones through Bluetooth. (Boys,
   city, interview)
    Overall, children in the project used spaces in their local environments frequently and
in a variety of ways at different times. The children used spaces where other children were
found, used space to move through to get to people and places, and used space to be alone.
Children’s uses of local places
The children also used a wide range of places in their local environments, as outlined in
Table 7, most commonly shops (80.3% at least once per week). After shops, other frequently
        Table 7. Children’s use of places in their local environments (n = 155).
                                                       At least
        Percentage of children         At least         once a     Once a year    Never (as
        using places                 once a week        month        or less     not nearby)
        Shops                            80.3            88.3           8.1           2.2
        Relatives’ houses                68.9            92.9          10.0           6.4
        Friends’ houses                  67.0            89.3           5.7           0.7
        Public places                    53.9            71.9          18.0           5.8
        Playgrounds                      13.0            31.7          33.8         28.8
        Source: SRQ.

           International Research in Geographical and Environmental Education               
Figure 3. “The take away” girl, city. Source: children’s photograph.
used places were facilities partly or wholly designed for children, such as green areas, sports
and youth centres. One-third of all children photographed common “green” areas on estates,
and children spoke very highly of such provision. In rural areas, children were more likely
to visit places of the natural environment, such as woods and beaches; conversely, in urban
areas, children were more likely to talk of elements of the built environment, such as youth
centres, shops and places to eat, as depicted in Figure 3. Like local spaces, places were not
only used for particular attractions as a place but also to meet others. In fact, the amount
and range of places used by the children made categorisation difficult, as many of the places
were a mixture of place types, for example, local shops were privately owned, but were
effectively a public facility used by many children to shop but also to meet outside of.
This was true of other spaces and/or places used by the children, such as youth centres and
Gaelic Athletic Association (GAA) facilities.
    The final types of places mentioned by the children were places they had made them-
selves. Although only two interview groups talked of such spaces, the amount of time they
spent talking of these places justifies inclusion, as the children described in detail about the
construction and use of these places. Like others (Derr, 2006; Hart, 1979), it was evident,
even with this small amount of children, that the girls focused on the insides of the dens,
for example, what they had put in the dens, whilst the boys talked about how they made the
dens, for example, the process of making dens out of tree branches.
    Overall, children used a wide range of spaces and places in their locality. The nature
of the environment itself appeared to be the largest determinant in what places and spaces
children used. Where there was a combination of spaces, places and people nearby, children
used their local environments to a great extent.

                                               S. Pike
Children’s learning in their local environments
From the children’s perspective, their experiences in their local environments were not
only valuable in themselves but also contributed to their learning, supporting previous
findings (Hart, 1979; Matthews, 1992; Moore, 1986). This learning was multi-faceted,
including cognitive and affective domains of learning, with experiences contributing to the
development of children’s knowledge of spaces and places and understanding of physical
and human processes.
    Across the range of data, there was evidence of extensive and intensive knowledge of
their local environments; for example, in the interviews, the extent of children’s knowledge
of their local environments was also evident, as illustrated in Figure 4 and within this
quote:
   Well, it’s a very long boreen and then you go in and my house and I’ve a bit of it going into
   a farmyard, which is my Nanny’s and all the brothers share. Then it’s kind of a dead end from
   there and then there are rough little pats (sic) that we use to keep the sheep up to the mountains.
   Then there’s no more houses or anything in further than my nanny’s. And then (there’s a) walk
   up to the fields and then we have old broken down sheds, houses and dipping tanks and stuff.
   (Girl, rural area, interview)
    As found elsewhere (Hart, 1979; Matthews, 1987), pictures showing the widest area
were drawn by children with the most spatial activity. Furthermore, the majority of children
drew pictures that (n = 133) were broadly topographically accurate (73.5%) and well
organised (88.7%). Overall, many children held detailed knowledge of the features and
people in their local environment. The children had an impressive awareness of human
processes and were able to describe changes that had occurred in their areas, explain
why these changes had occurred and appreciate different people’s views on such changes,
Figure 4. My local environment, girl, rural area. Source: child’s picture.

            International Research in Geographical and Environmental Education                   
reflecting previous studies (Chawla, 2002; Hart, 1992). Their awareness of change in the
local environment, including changes that had happened or were about to happen, was
apparent in their photographs, with 82.7% taking the photograph because of past or future
changes. Overall, 70% of children looked at their local paper each week and over 80%
used their local environment on a weekly basis, and so, it was not surprising that the
children knew what was going on in their locality! There were a number of local processes
on which children had quite marked opinions and were concerned about, particularly the
closing of facilities and the increase in traffic volumes. Children appeared to have less of an
understanding of local physical processes, as no children talked of local physical processes
in any of the interviews. For example, the children photographed those places that were
changing due to physical processes, but this was not given as a reason why they took the
photograph.
     Although the children had a range of knowledge and understanding of their local
environments, it was not strictly developmental, as suggested by constructivist theories of
children’s learning (Piaget & Inhelder, 1954). For example, some children found it difficult
to draw their locality but could describe it in detail, whilst other children appeared to know
little about the human and physical processes in their locality but were able to engage
verbally in complex ideas about the influences on changes in their area. It was evident that
children’s experiences contributed to their learning beyond cognitive abilities, with evident
mixing of cognitive and affective dimensions of children’s learning, for example, in relation
to ideas and opinions about local changes.
     Through the use of the local environment, children constructed detailed knowledge
about the local spaces, places and people, and it was evident that knowledge of local spaces
was something the children were proud of. Children also expressed how experiences in
their local environments contributed to their spatial awareness, their knowledge of places,
their sense of safety and their sense of fun:
    It’s more fun than watching telly all day. If you’re playing something or someone’s chasing you
    or something it gets funny like, it gets so funny and then you have to stop running because
    you’re laughing so hard. (Girl, town centre, interview)
     Overall, children’s experiences in their locality developed a range of cognitive and
affective dimensions in children’s learning, as well as being good fun.
Children’s learning at home and school
Within and around the local environment, children appeared to develop their knowledge and
understanding of the local environment from themselves (constructed learning) and from
others (received learning), with most of the children’s experiences of the local environments
emanating from home rather than from the school. Children had experiences of learning
about their local environments at school; however, this was far less common than their
home-based experiences, with experiences of local learning in geography varying from
class to class. The teachers’ preferences were evident to the children. For example, in
Seaview School, the teacher drew heavily on the local environment, an area rich in historical
features and stories, although the teacher’s ambivalent attitude to geography was reflected
in the children’s negative attitude to it. In contrast, at a City Boys’ school, the teacher had a
particular interest in geography and incorporated local geography into classroom planning.
     Overall, the SRQ, as summarised in Tables 8 and 9, revealed the types of activities that
the children carried out in geography lessons in school geography, with children spending

                                           S. Pike
         Table 8. Children’s experiences of learning local environments at home (n = 165).
                                            At least once a Once a year or Not near/in my
         Percentage of children                  week               less              home
         Walking locally                         81.2                5.8                –
         Cycling locally                         68.9               10.1                –
         Visiting shops                          80.3                6.6                2.0
         Visiting relatives’ houses              75.0                3.6                0.7
         Visiting friends’ houses                70.0                6.4                6.4
         Look at local paper                     60.2                7.8                8.5
         Look at a local picture                   7.6              33.6               35.0
         Look at local aerial photographs        17.1               32.1               34.3
         Source: SRQ.
relatively little time in learning about their locality (34.9% once a term; 12.1% never), with
figures for learning about the school environments even lower (24.6% once a term; 16.4%
never). Furthermore, active engagement in the local environment through fieldwork was
infrequent in all of the schools that the children attended. Children tended to be carrying
out passive activities on non-local environments in geography lessons, such as learning
about Ireland and other countries from a textbook.
     Children had varied views of their local learning; some felt that it was exclusively part
of their home experience, whilst others felt that it should be part of their school experiences.
Where they expressed an opinion, it was clear that children were not impressed by geography
lessons that were book based, even though this was a common experience for many of them.
Girls were particularly negative about these experiences, but when their teacher diverted
from the book, the children were much happier about their experiences:
    Our teacher just does what’s in the book. If I was a teacher I’d just go “Yer right . . . book
    goodbye” and improvise I’d start my own thing. You learn more from a person than a book,
    as a person has been more places than the book. When our teacher talks about (her town), it’s
    really interesting. We are hanging on her every word. (Girl, large city, interview)
     Teachers clearly inluenced the extent to which children engaged in learning about
locality, as shown in Table 10. Overall, the children’s personally constructed knowledge of
   Table 9. Children’s experiences of learning various environments in school (n = 155).
                                                  At least    At least
   Number of children stating that they           once a       once a         At least
   carried out this activity                      month          term       once a year     Never
   Local environment
      Learning about school area                    25.6         30.7           27.1        16.4
      Learning about local environments             34.9         30.7           22.1        12.1
      Learning about county                         33.3         22.7           17.7         5.7
   Non-local environment
      Learning about country                        71.6         14.9            9.2         4.3
      Learning about MEDCs                          38.6         20.7           19.3        21.4
      Learning about LEDCs                          41.6         27.1           18.6        22.9
   Source: SRQ.

            International Research in Geographical and Environmental Education                     
   Table 10. Teacher influence on learning in geography.
                                                     Teachers in this study who . . .
                                    were recently    were a local      had local      had a geography
                                      qualified        resident         interest          interest
   . . . were significantly more likely to enable the children to∗
   Learn about school                     No              No              No                Yes
   Learn about local area                 No              No              No                Yes
   Learn about county                    Yes              Yes             No                Yes
   Use a map of local area                No              No              No                Yes
   Use a map of county                   Yes              Yes             No                Yes
   Use a map of Ireland                   No              No              No                Yes
   Draw a map of school                   No              Yes             No                 No
   Draw a map of local area               No              No              Yes                No
   Draw a map of county                  Yes              Yes             No                Yes
   Use school grounds                     No              No              Yes               Yes
   Do fieldwork in the locality          Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes
    As measured by a Mann–Whitney U test where p < 0.05.
   Source: SRQ.
their local environments greatly outweighed their knowledge gained from experiences at
school.

Conclusions and recommendations
In summary, children used their local environments in a diverse range of ways; they used
the spaces around their homes intensively, and when time and parents permitted, they
ventured further and used the space more extensively. They used specific places in the
built environment, formally for organised activity and informally. Overall, the children
took advantage of the affordances of people, spaces and places to construct personal local
environments, showing their engagement with many elements of Catling’s model. Whilst
the children referred many of these elements of the local environment, certain elements
were alluded to more than others; notably, the social environment appeared to be the
most important element of the locality for the children. After people, the natural and built
environment was considered important to the children, although the relative importance of
these types of environment depended on the setting. The fact that children in rural areas used
the built environment and children in urban areas used the natural environment revealed the
value of varied environments for children, whatever setting they live in. Overall, Catling’s
model provided a suitable model of the children’s uses of their locality, although in reality
the elements of the environment varied for each child involved.
    Children’s use of the environment, and their interactions with people, space and places,
meant they had well-developed, broadly positive attitudes to their locality, with some
children not wanting to change their locality at all. This finding brings into question the
recurring assumption within the curriculum in Ireland and elsewhere of a need to “improve”
the locality (DES/NCCA, 1999a, pp. 61, 84). Although this was very encouraging, there
were also elements of their locality that children had extremely negative views about
ranging from large-scale problems, through to smaller scale issues. In all areas, there was
no audience for children’s articulate and considered points to make about what would
improve their experiences in their locality. So, whilst in some aspects the children had
dynamic geographies, as illustrated in the right of Catling’s model, in terms of empowered

                                               S. Pike
Table 11. Examples of children’s learning in their local environments.
Examples of learning                 Cognitive development            Affective development
Developed by children in        Knowledge of locality (S/H)   Responding and reacting to locality
   study                                                       (H)
                                Comprehension of local        Valuing locality (S/H)
                                   processes (H)
                                Evaluation of locality (S/H)  Expressing ideas and opinions (S/H)
                                                              Appreciating the opinions of others
                                                                (S/H)
Potential for development       Understanding and analysis of Participation in local
   (in school and at home)         local physical and human     decision-making
                                   processes                  Receiving attitudes
                                                              Organisation of values
                                Evaluation of local physical  Resolving conflicts
                                   and human processes        Appreciating diverse opinions
                                                              Participation in local decision
                                                                making
                                                              Managing risks
H  = largely at home; S = largely at school.
Source: Adapted from Bloom (1976).
citizens, they remained to the left of the diagram. The children’s interactions with their local
environments meant that they had a connection with it, suggesting that any attempt to use
the locality as a basis for geography education was likely to be successful. Again referring
to Catling’s model, the children’s connection with their locality suggested that a move to
the right of the model could enhance children’s experiences of geography education.
     Children were in no doubt that experience in their locality resulted in learning that
was relevant and useful both now and in the future, examples of which are outlined in
Table 11. In terms of their activity, evidence across the data sources revealed that chil-
dren enjoyed using their locality; they liked interacting with others, for example, whilst
partaking in social and sporting activities. Such activity was valued by the children, mak-
ing them feel part of their community and confident as a social actor in their locality. In
this way, children’s interactions with their locality were very important, even if the chil-
dren learned nothing from them. In fact, the overwhelming evidence from the project is
that children’s use of the local environment contributed to different dimensions of their
learning. Drawing on Bloom’s work on the dimensions of children’s learning, there was
evidence of children’s cognitive development, including their knowledge (e.g. spatial aware-
ness and place knowledge) and to a lesser extent their understanding (e.g. understanding
of physical and human process) through their use of their local environments as out-
lined in Table 12 (Bloom, 1976). However, a disparity between personally constructed
learning and received learning in schools resulted in variations in children’s cognition in
geography.
     Despite the growing evidence for the importance of local experiences for children’s cur-
rent and future lives (Hart, 1979; Holloway & Valentine, 2000b; Matthews, 1992; Spencer
& Blades, 2006), there was evidence of a “discontinuity between home and school local
experiences” (Catling, 2005, p. 325). Whilst children described how teachers made fre-
quent reference to the locality, sustained learning on local topics was only experienced by
one class of children. In fact, across all the classes, children spent more time in learning
about distant localities than they did about their locality, despite curriculum requirements
to balance place studies (DES/NCCA, 1999b). This pattern reflects previous findings of

            International Research in Geographical and Environmental Education                  
 Table 12. Encouraging use of the local environment by children.
                                        Examples of activities
 Formal                                                                  Informal
 Fieldwork in school grounds                     Discussions of local examples when studying
                                                    physical processes
 Enquiries into local issues                     Discussions about leisure time
 Projects on leisure time activities             Discussions on local issues affecting children
 Fieldwork to local streams or rivers            Talking about experiences, e.g. our news
                                                    activities, circle time.
 Practical experiences of safe ways to cross     Discussion of fears over use of locality
   roads in the locality
 Role plays on local issues
 Walking to school initiatives: 20-km speed
   limits near schools, walking buses
degrees of non-implementation of curricular in the RoI (Gash, 1985; INTO, 1995). This
lack of implementation of both the 1971 CnB and the 1999 PSC in relation to the local
environment in geography means that children such as those were lacking certain aspects
of their geography education, by not learning key concepts in geography using familiar
examples from their locality. Such planning in geography is recognised within both educa-
tion theory and more practical guidance for learning in primary geography (Catling, 2003;
Scoffham, 2006).
     The recommendations arising from this project draw together some of the disparities
described above to effectively help shift children’s experiences to the right of Catling’s
model (2003, p. 172). The main recommendation arising from this project is to incorporate
children’s local experiences into their learning experiences in schools. The children involved
in this project had a wealth of knowledge, understanding, skills and attitudes in relation
to the people, places and processes in their localities; however, as outlined above, this
knowledge was not generally drawn upon and developed in school. As there is curriculum
provision to do this with children of all ages in primary schools (DES/NCCA, 1999a,
1999b, 1999c), this project reveals the capabilities of children to engage in their local
environment and hence enhance their learning at school. In other contexts in which this is
not the case, this study reveals the importance of local learning to be included in primary
school geography curricular. There are a number of dimensions of children’s learning that
could be encouraged in schools. First, as Catling suggests, learning about the locality can
be approached formally, through studies of children’s localities and their experiences within
them, and informally, through learning about the lives of children in terms of their own
and adults’ geographies (Catling, 2005). Second, the local environment can be used to help
children understand about other places, in comparative work or in using key concepts such
as development and decision-making in geography. In this way, by understanding the world
at hand in Catling’s model, the world beyond children’s direct experiences can also begin
to make sense to the children. Such activity would contribute to the affective and cognitive
domains of children’s learning, as outlined in Table 12. Children’s use of the locality can
also be fostered in school beyond school-based work. For example, teachers could act on
suggestions made by children, or in their own classrooms and communities. The benefits
of developing such content and methods specifically in school geography in Irish and other
schools would be numerous. First, such practice would bring geography experiences in
school more into line with theoretical and practical ideas about what are positive experiences
for children in geography. Second, it would mean that geography in primary schools was


                                            S. Pike
more positive and challenging for children. For example, if teachers use the locality for
learning in primary geography, much of the content that is covered can then be applied to
other localities; making sense of the local can help children understand wider patterns and
processes in the world. Furthermore, many of the skills learnt in primary school, such as
decision-making and fieldwork activities, can be built on later in geographical experiences.
Third, children would enjoy geography more, as evidence from the children’s initial reaction
to this project and elsewhere is that geography is often not particularly popular!
    The second recommendation from this project is the promotion and implementation of
children’s participation in decision-making in local communities. Children in this project
had important points to make about their localities, including changes for themselves and
for others. Most ideas were relatively easy to achieve but would not necessarily have been
thought of by adults, reflecting previous findings (Chawla, 2002; Hart, 1992). As there
is evidence that when children’s ideas are heard and acted upon the results are positive,
children having a say in the geography of their locality makes sense. Therefore, the second
recommendation from this project is that children’s participation should be mainstreamed,
through children’s participative initiatives such as Dáil na nÓg (DnÓ) (national youth
parliament) and Dáil na bPáistı́ (DnP).
    The third recommendation from this project is the development of research with children
about their local environments in a further range of contexts. Throughout the project, from
reviewing the literature to working with children, it was evident that there were many
avenues that this research could have taken, in terms of the research topics and the research
methods and techniques.
    In conclusion, like others involved in geography education (Catling, 2003; Catling &
Willy, 2009; Scoffham, 2006), this project has confirmed my belief that the creative use
of the local environment opens up a wealth of opportunities for children’s learning in
geography and that this learning should be used beyond school for the benefits of local
communities, but most of all for the children themselves.
Acknowledgements
This project was made possible by the children who took part; so, the author wishes to thank all the
children involved for their enormous contribution to the project. She also wishes to thank the teachers
who facilitated the project in their classroom. This project was partially funded by the Research
Committee of St. Patrick’s College, to whom the author also expresses her gratitude. The author
wishes to thank Janette Elwood of Queen’s University, Belfast and Simon Catling of Oxford Brookes
University for their support in this project.


